and didn't have a lot of money.
Dick Manning was a lawyer?
Was he a lawyer?
I think he was.
What was he?
He was in college.
Was he in college out here?
Dick Manning?
No, Richard Manning now.
Yeah, mediators we're talking.
I know.
He said he used to come in to us in Hollywood.
Maybe when he came to town.
Because we don't remember.
But he was never a big collector in those days.
We never had anything big.
He started buying, what, seven years ago?
seven when i interviewed him in march it was seven years ago he said uh yeah not surprised but he wanted this room you know and he saw the room and it was and this is for me you know there's his wife and he said between them they buy about 500 things a year things things i mean that means you have to buy something every day more today you got to buy two things tomorrow he said they're average just 500 i mean it's maybe a book it may be a gorgeous piece of uh
They must have a busy life, running out every day to find new things.
And they give stuff.
He says, we're junkies, and I hate that phrase.
I wish we didn't find another word, but it just has this other connotation.
Can you tell me some interesting stories, collecting stories of people?
I'm going to have to leave in about five minutes, because every Tuesday night for the last ten years, I have two other friends that I go out with.
I unfortunately do not have any thanks whatsoever, so I can spend the evening with you.
Let's just chat a little bit.
Okay, so if you'll excuse me, my pleasure.
It's really great.
I'll lock the door behind you.
I'll see you in the morning.
Okay.
Okay?
Nice seeing you.
Good night.
Appreciate it.
My pleasure.
Okay.
I will indeed, thank you.
Just by chance, the deaccessioning issue just came up, and we were talking with Mell yesterday, and did he say something about they do deaccession, or they're looking, they will?
Yeah, Mell Abelstein, I'm forgetting, we were talking about yesterday.
He said that they, at some point, they're going to be having some wonderful secrets down there.
Are they going to sell them at auctions, aren't they?
I asked about that, and it didn't sound like it was one of the auctions.
But it may.
He was vague, okay, on that.
But the point is, you know, I guess they're going to be accession duplicates.
Texas doesn't.
You know, Texas has... Someday that may change.
When they get sensible about it.
Well, it's a state, you know.
They really do.
It's a state-owned thing.
I understand, but certainly there are probably things that they would like in the future that they'd be able to obtain.
Yeah, but also they might want to trade, which is kind of interesting.
Oh, yeah.
Well, we've occasionally done that because that would make more sense to them.
They can't use the funds.
Frequently, when they do sell something, the funds does not go back into their own budget.
It goes into a general budget and doesn't go directly into acquisitions.
It may go into putting in your room or whatever, and so they just as soon keep it.
Can you tell me some good Zeitlin stories or Howell stories?
I'm looking for some nice anecdotal things, too.
About, you know, a little bit of stories come to mind.
You know, every bookseller knows stories, many of which he really doesn't want in print.
That's the problem.
I mean, I really have had personal experiences many years.
Every Tuesday I would have lunch with Jake Seidling for the last five or six years before his death, because we were neighbors right next door.
And he shared a lot with me.
He did tell me his greatest regret in his life was that he never kept eternal.
There is an oral history of him, though.
Oh, it's an oral history, yeah.
He was interviewed, but it was one thing to be interviewed and another thing to be interviewed.
At least there's something recorded.
And I had to see it.
I had to see it.
I just learned of its existence.
But did he teach you a lot?
Kind of what you're saying to me is that you and your brother, you kind of learned on the fly.
I don't know that I've... I actually think Jake was a remarkable man, but I don't think he was a remarkable businessman.
I think he was a reasonably poor businessman.
I'm talking business.
As a book lover, he was a great book lover.
He was a great book man.
I'm just saying, but as a businessman, I think he was that.
Is that the key to success in this business?
Well, it is business.
I mean, people try to
It is.
I mean, the reason that this shop works is because we conduct it as a business.
We do not hide books that we feel that we love and we know are wonderful.
It's our favorite book.
We're selling a product.
It's wonderful.
I mean, that's one of the reasons that I think we do well.
I know there are a lot of sour grapes about us, but I believe that there would be about anybody who does well in any profession.
the high up yard, there's always somebody who feels, and I don't personalize it at all.
because I feel that I'm satisfied with who I am, and everybody else has to deal with their own problems.
I certainly don't read any of it, and frankly, if it's criticism, and I frankly haven't heard any criticism, do you?
I've heard veiled solid breaks, maybe.
I think there's a cynicism about how we achieved what we achieved.
I mean, oh yeah, right, if somebody gave you $10 million, you know, you could do the same thing.
I mean, really, I'm surprised that you told me that you were in the real estate business.
Well, I'm not alone in the real estate business.
You've never been in the real estate business?
I've never been in the real estate business.
I had customers that I, at one time in 1976 to 1980, who were in the real estate business, who were helping me, and I was selling them books, and they were selling me some buildings.
I mean, this is very modest compared to it.
No, no, no.
I mean, it's not like you had an office over there where you were buying and selling beautiful homes in Beverly Hills.
That was my impression that you did.
That's what I heard.
I told my wife this.
I said, so-and-so told me.
Well, we owned a half a dozen apartment buildings, and we sold them and bought this and the hotel.
But to buy this piece of property.
I mean, even this piece of property, we bought it $1,400,000.
It's expensive.
We had to put $800,000 to get it started.
So we sold off some of the more modest, but we didn't have it.
No, that's, you know, hey, that's not what I'm saying.
But we're not in the real world.
A couple of business, a couple of tycoons, you know, in the real, so that's a mess.
Well, that's because we're fairly aggressive at sales, and the reason we are is because Ben and I have the same conviction about auctions, that every auction has opportunities, and if you go to a sale and you pick out the things you want and you're waiting and you miss them, you're disappointed,
We're almost always prepared to bid on every lot in the sale.
You ask Christie's or Sotheby's, and they'll tell you, if we come to the sale, they know there's not much that's going to get bored.
You got a permanent paddle?
Oh, yeah.
What are your numbers?
I don't remember my number.
I never even raise my paddle, to tell you the truth.
I raise my hand, and they write it down.
I never even pick up the paddle.
I think Quarage is 57.
I mean, I know them.
I'm just curious.
I honestly don't.
You sit upstairs sometimes, too.
Well, every once in a while, not generally, and I don't, I did because I was joining somebody.
What are you up to here, Tim?
It's $20, I'm not going to be an awesome position now, you're a babysitter.
It's beautiful.
Tell me, do I know you?
This is David.
No, I'm Nick Basman.
I'm a writer, and that's my wife, Connie, and we're out here, writing a book on the book world.
Yeah?
Prominent members thereof.
Good place to start.
David has been binding for how many years?
Since he was 14.
Where did you learn the craft?
I learned it in a number of places, but mostly in the school of training.
Did you go into this because the family's in the book business?
Well, I figured it was the only way that I could stick around here, you know, to learn something about the book business.
I wasn't a very good salesman.
I was committed to being a book finder when I was about 14 years old.
Why?
What happened?
Well, because it was the only thing that I could see at the time.
He was actually working as a rapper or something.
And dilute corners on books and things like that.
A $10,000 book one time fell apart in my hands, and I felt so guilty about it.
Right.
You're trying to recover ever since.
What was the book?
Oh, he doesn't remember.
It was a large plate book.
That doesn't tell us.
I remember that you kept saying, well, where's that book?
We're still looking for it, Dave, by the way.
When we find it, we're going to be in touch with you on here.
I got back to England.
It was the first thing I worked on.
Well, he went over to England.
We sent him there for a year to study.
That helped out a lot.
Did I bring you a close-up, by the way?
No, we're open tonight.
This is lessons.
Oh, you have classes tonight?
Yeah.
Well, the reason I was late is because of my car.
I worked with a battery panel.
Oh, really?
Yeah.
I left the air conditioner around.
Oh, so you had to tell.
Okay, because I was wondering, I asked about you.
Yeah, I worked with a battery.
I've covered a lot, Tom.
Is there anything I missed?
I just want to... My wife tells me I'm pretty repetitive sometimes, asking the same question.
Well, sometimes you repeat the question when you're not satisfied with the first answer.
That's about what I'm feeling.
She's a social worker, right?
people say whatever they want to say.
Well, we know better, right?
Well, we know better.
Exactly.
But really, I am interested in how you feel when you see some customers come in and go crazy over a printable.
Do you empathize with that?
Does it bemuse you in any way?
No, I think... Do you share that passion?
Well, you can help but get wrapped up in a little bit, but we see it often enough when people walk in this place.
They're overwhelmed frequently, because these books are available for sale, and they're really surprised at that.
We see it often enough that it's hard to get the same level of enthusiasm, you know?
And so it's sort of like watching the birth process.
The first time I saw it was, I believe, with the second time.
You know, if you had 36 children, say, oh, my baby, you know?
Yeah, you'd send it in if you had one of the kids.
Right.
So although we share some of the enthusiasm, and we recognize that it's
You couldn't be a bibliomaniac, personally.
You don't see it in your fabric.
I think that I have to have a touch of it in me to have what I have.
I really do.
I think it's beyond coincidence that I'm in the book business.
I'll give you this thing, by the way, I wrote called My First Year in the Business.
I'd like that.
It's just a three- or four-page article on how I got into the book business.
I think that would be very useful.
It's really mostly about Compton in my first year.
It's more humorous than anything else, but it's truthful, as I recall.
It's a very important thing.
I expect that I'll call you at some point, too, to go over some things.
You say, what does everything you say mean?
You know, the beauty of these interviews is everyone is
been different, and I've always come away with something I didn't expect.
Well, I'm much more frivolous than most people.
I mean, I really love what I do, but I don't take this business as seriously as most people in this business do.
I mean, it's really fortuitous to be in a business where all your customers are basically pretty happy, financially well-off people.
I mean, with fair exceptions, of course.
The average guy who comes in this store,
He's prepared to buy something fairly expensive.
So chances are he's been fairly successful in life.
He's indulging himself.
Nobody needs what I have to sell.
Who needs rare books?
I mean, I have to create that interest, right?
Do you think so?
I don't, because nobody really, I don't think, nobody needs it.
Nobody has to create that interest to me.
I don't know.
I want, my interest is here.
Oh, I know.
You just have to point the things out to me.
I know, but I'm talking about life's essentials.
I mean, really, what is the priority?
Sometimes it's really confusing to most books.
If you ask any bookseller in the most honest moment, you know, does he really totally believe that this book is worth $50,000?
I mean, $50,000 is the purchasing power of it versus other things in this world.
It's really confusing sometimes.
What's your answer to that question?
Oh, I think it's absolutely a personal decision.
I mean, I just...
Whenever I tell a person, don't be silly, don't buy it, I almost always sell it, right?
If I say, oh, you have to have this book, you can't live without it, I don't believe that.
I think you can live without everything.
Although, I'll tell you one thing that Jake Zayton told me you could put this down.
One day I had a client who was looking at a book for $3,000.
He was thinking about it.
He said, well, I don't know.
And I said, well, I don't know.
And he said, yeah, I'll take it.
I'll take it.
And I said, great.
And I said, you know, I'm surprised you're buying it.
It doesn't fit in your collection.
And he said, you know,
You're right, it doesn't.
Maybe I won't take it.
Put it back.
And then I told Jake, because I had lunch with him that day, and he said, you know, he says, the one thing you should learn in this business, when a customer says, I'll take it, you stop talking.
And it was pretty simple.
I said, you're right.
You know, and I made it.
I got home and said, I can't believe it.
I probably still have the book in my safe if you want to see it.
I don't remember.
But the point is, it's true.
When a customer says, you know, I'll take it.
There's a time, there's a time to shut up.
Yeah, right.
If anything, I get a little too chatty.
And that time, I've since learned.
I've never done that since.
Because it's a personal decision.
Why should I question what he should have?
Well, how about if the guy says, $3,000 is too much, I give you $2,500.
We do not do that.
I mean, I occasionally, uh, I,
I think every bookseller occasionally will be flexible in the price, you know, unless it's something he just acquired or he has other people for.
And he knows how much money he has.
Listen, I had a call from Warner Brothers today, and they were buying a person for the head of Warner Brothers.
I don't know who it is, and it's $750, and they called me back and said,
We decided, this guy calls me, Mr. Weinstein, we'll give you $500 for this book.
And I said, excuse me?
I said, it's priced $750.
Is it priced $500?
He said, no, it's $750.
He says, well, how about $550?
And I said, go buy it someplace else.
And just out of principle, I would never do that.
And then the guy finally confessed to me, said, listen, I'm fairly new here.
I'm only 22 years old, and I thought it would be good if I could buy it and it would look good on my record.
We don't do that as a rule.
I have clients that make enormous purchases who are very consistent that I would spend a 10% discount to.
Which is kind of standard.
Yeah, right.
But that's it.
Out of principle, if a stranger walked in and said, would you take such and such a choice now?
Especially if you, as a collector, know that the price is fair.
Yeah, if it's right.
Well, if I feel there's a justification that the book is in less than wonderful condition.
Oh, yeah, and if I say, gee, did you know that this is missing a leaf?
Well, then I was definitely making a justification.
Yeah, the spine is cracked like daddy goes off.
That doesn't happen.
No, but I think everybody is flexible.
I think it's important to be flexible.
Some people are fairly stubborn about it, and I think it's silly.
Is the L.A.
collective a distinctive, I was going to say, unique creature?
Well, a lot of income.
In many cases made quickly over the last couple of years.
I have 7,000 people on my mailing list.
I'll bet you at least
Between 500 and 1,000 are worth a million dollars or more.
I mean, I have a lot of wealthy customers on my mailing list, and I'll bet you 100 of them are worth 25 million more, 50 million, I mean, really big numbers.
I mean, I don't know the numbers, because I mean, I have to look at Forbes and figure it out.
I know at least 10 customers that are worth a half a billion dollars that are on my mailing list.
Half a billion would be 500 million dollars.
Yeah, it doesn't matter.
You know, it doesn't matter because, no, they're not people coming every week and visit me.
I mean, people, most, the richer they are, the less often I see them.
That doesn't, and more often I don't work directly with them.
The biggest customers I have, I don't even work with them, to tell you the truth.
I meet them once, I meet their librarian, their assistant, their assistants are their assistants.
Yeah.
But I don't mind them.
One or two other questions.
Tell me about the Gutenberg.
There's a stained-glass window where you and your brother are represented in it.
Tell me a little bit about that.
Well, actually, that's described in the brochure, but basically it's... But the brochure doesn't say that you and Ben are pictured there.
I think it does.
It says that it was unknown who the...
printers were in this early Badis Ascentius woodcutter spelt in there.
Although we spelt Badis Ascentius wrong, I found out.
We have one letter off, and we're going to work on that.
But that was just it.
When we put this place together, we were trying to do something a little different, because there's so little creativity in our business, that's all.
And I think we've accomplished that, because it is a different feeling.
And you'll come in here on the Saturdays and we have a lot of our regulars in here who come in every Saturday and they'll spend $500 to $5,000 and they're professional people.
But you have to sell a lot of, even sell, you know, they did a census in my business just this past year of the 400 members of the ABAA, which is our trade organization.
You're president.
Past president, right.
Of the 400 members, over 200 members grossed less than $100,000 a year.
And so, of the 400 members, I think there were less than 20 that grossed a million.
That's how small the business was.
So really, the Iraq figures to indicate that you're at the top of the field.
I wasn't familiar with the census.
Yeah.
Well, I'm telling you, it's— Who's close to you?
Well, probably the biggest grossing books, I assume, is Krauss in this country.
Or you could say Strand.
Or Argosy.
I don't know what Argosy does.
Well, yeah, but I'm talking about rare books.
Those are volume used books.
Yeah, because Strand, you know, Strand is a unique creature.
Review books.
But I don't, you know, it's never really been something I've thought of a great deal about.
But I show you one thing, that in the future, if we don't, we're going to do something very dramatic in this business.
I mean, very dramatic, like...
What we're going to, if we don't expand dramatically or really build, we're going to have a large impact, you know, on the market in the future.
I'm working on some things now.
You've been new as a group?
Are you an individual?
Well, I've been, we've been actually, and I'd prefer if you didn't publish this, we've been offered to buy our company, I buy a very large company with a disc shop.
We've been approached to buy us out there early in the year, and a lot of people in the business know about it, I don't know if you've heard it, buy a large company with a
enormous portfolio who want to make a very serious purchase in their books and want the best to spearhead it.
And we have negotiated for several months to buy me out and open a shop in New York and London, and that's why I said there's a possibility.
My book is not coming out for another year and a half.
It will be done or not done by that.
This should all be resolved.
It will be resolved in 90 days.
Well, then I think I'd like to call it back in 90 days.
Well, I mean, I know, I know, we've been
I have contracts sitting in my box for two months, but I haven't.
But these people want, in other words, there's a real possibility you might be out of this business.
No, I wouldn't be out of it all.
I'll be in charge of a very large organization.
I mean, a large business.
You'll have a parent.
I'll have the largest bookshop in the world if this goes through.
I mean, I could have it now if I wanted.
The problem is if I sell out my business, I'm not a sub-Chapter S corporation, which means that if I sell out my business, say for every million dollars I get,
My corporation pays 35 percent tax, and then the money left over goes to me, and I pay 35 percent of that, 40 percent of that.
So I only end up with 30 percent on the dollar.
So it's, right now, it's very unappealing.
Yeah, exactly.
No, but the opportunity they're offering me is what's exciting.
Is this a non-book company?
Nothing new with books.
It's a company that's very cash-heavy.
American or offshore, as they say?
It's an American company.
California-based or New York-based?
Well, they have offices in seven countries.
But there are principal offices in Los Angeles.
But if these people say, hey, there's nobody serious in this business.
There's no serious money in this business.
There's no serious promotion.
What do they see, though?
Do they see a growth industry here?
Well, let's put it this way.
It's a diversification for them.
It would probably, if they put out
$20 million that would represent probably less than 1% of their assets.
So it's just another thing for them.
They're just looking for places to do this.
And I think there's a glamour in the business that they find.
They've been in.
We've spoken to them.
I flew to New York and London with them.
I mean, we've went through this whole thing.
So the talks are ongoing?
The talks have been ongoing.
They've stopped for the last month because I'm having terrible tax problems and it's unappealing.
And I sent there actually last week in London talking to people over there trying to...
who I recommended that I were to run New York and London shop.
He's Joseph and Jim Cummings, the people.
I mean, those are the guys.
I said, I want Jim to run my New York shop and, I mean, part of this thing.
And they would have to buy all three of these.
So there's all the water that trams at the MCI, then.
It's a possibility.
Yeah.
I mean, it's a possibility.
It's a fairly complex.
When can I call you on this?
Well, I mean, things change every day in that
I have stopped negotiating because I have some tax problems that are unappealing, and I told them that if they could work it out with the other individuals, Jim and David, that I would be more inclined to be flexible.
Well, part of the deal, then, part of the proposal is that you would have a store in New York and a store in London.
A retail store.
They want to get right on the street in London, or they want to get right on Madison Avenue.
Would you all have the same name, Heritage?
To be discussed.
I mean, we don't know.
But would you all share the same name?
No, probably not.
It would probably be E. Joseph, a division of heritage.
Of course, it is valuable.
Well, it's great.
It's the future.
It's great because it would be dramatically different and exciting.
We would then have virtually unlimited funds to buy at auction.
We wouldn't have to work.
It was well restricted by availability of cash flow, you know, and things like that.
And these people believe that what I convinced them, and better so than I realized, that there is a limited supply of this product available.
And they're not trying to buy it and hide it or something, but they believe that a person who is aggressive in buying it will really bring out a lot of new people.
They could bring me a lot of people, because they're involved with a lot of other businesses.
So you can't tell me off the record who they are?
Well, it doesn't matter.
It's a corporation.
It's a private corporation.
No, I definitely couldn't tell you how to.
It's finalized.
I mean, you wouldn't have heard of them anyway.
The company, you've never heard of them.
The individuals, you would have heard of them.
And you can't tell me off the record.
No, no, I can't intuit finalized.
I mean, I'd be happy to tell you
who's comfortable with them.
But I'm going to get back in touch with you.
Yeah, it would be interesting.
When it's all over one way or the other, will you tell me?
Oh, yeah, of course you are.
I mean, even if you don't.
Listen, half the people in the East Coast think it happened already.
I've had people put in it.
Then why can't you tell me?
Well, nobody knows the individual, because the individual is a corporation.
It's not an individual or a company that you have ever heard of.
Okay.
I mean, it's a company that I couldn't find anything about, and I had to do a lot of work.
Maybe I could find it.
No, this is the... Couldn't find that.
I found everything I wanted.
This is part of the whole company.
I'm going to shut this down.
I think we really covered... Okay, I just turned it away.
I'm sorry.
I really don't think you did.
I think you gave us some very good stuff.
Did I miss anything, hon?
Let me see if I... Oh, that's okay.
Fine.